# Six Open Data Values

## Start with Users

The first step in opening data is focusing on demand. This spring, the Open Data team partnered with Reboot, a social impact firm dedicated to inclusive development and accountable governance, to better understand current and potential users of Open Data. Reboot’s work built on past research partnerships between MODA and academic institutions, and is part of the Open Data team’s efforts to continue to understand the new ways New Yorkers can deliver value to their communities through open data. Reboot’s research leveraged applied urban ethnography and design research to build user personas and a set of actionable recommendations for engaging new users. Reboot publicly presented the research at Civic Hall in May and published it on the Open Data website. This research contributes to the body of evidence the Open Data team continues to collect to be tactical about engaging users where they are at and spurring demand in communities less familiar to Open Data.

## Encourage purposeful and easy engagement.

Open Data is a platform that should be used as a tool for feedback. The initiative succeeds through the participation and oversight of community stakeholders — old and new. After user research indicated that the digital interface of the Open Data catalog was confusing and intimidating to new users, the Open Data team committed to building a new, more accessible website through collaborative engagement with users. In partnership with the DoITT NYC Gov Lab and the Studio UX team, the Open Data team leveraged human-centered design (HCD) methodology in designing the website, engaging high-frequency users in a design charrette and community groups in user testing sessions. The revamped Portal includes a new Open Data Help Desk, powered by the Screendoor application that streamlines several feedback channels. In the four months since the Help Desk launched, the team has received more than 400 new comments and inquiries. The new system not only enables the team to better respond to user needs, but to also collect data on inquiry types. This valuable source of information helps ensure that technology updates and new tutorials are based on known user needs. Substantive engagement is more than an obligation; it must be default for Open Data.

## Treat the publication of the dataset as the first step of opening data.

If the City publishes a dataset but no one uses it, is it really “open?” In New York City, “open” really means “useful.” In addition to partnering with DoITT on Open Data, MODA works with other City agencies on advanced data analytics projects. Using the data associated with a City operation, MODA develops models to make services better, faster, and more equitable. Another practical expression of this Open Data value is MODA’s commitment to Open Source Analytics, or its practice of sharing the process and results of data analytics projects with the public. It not only increases transparency on the way City agencies use data and develop algorithms, but also helps spread awareness of the power of data science in municipal service delivery. Simply handing over a finished set of analytics work limits civil servants’ insight into how the analysis was done. The process – including what type of analysis was conducted and why, insights gained from subject matter experts, and disclaimers on the data – is just as important as the results. Open Source Analytics is MODA’s commitment to replicability, in understanding analytics as a process that can be applied elsewhere. Working in government holds data analysts to a higher standard than industry to be transparent about goals, process, and results. To this end, this fall, MODA will release a project library, documentation on its framework for implementation, and hold an engagement tour for its Open Source Analytics work.

## Empower agencies.

By empowering champions in every agency and office, the City narrows the gap between data experts and Open Data users, improving its ability to be a good data steward. This spring, the Open Data team surveyed all Open Data Coordinators (ODCs), the appointed staff within individual agencies who manage data publishing, to better understand their needs. That survey showed that some Coordinators lacked clarity on their role, and what was required of them. The Open Data team responded by implementing a new, simpler data inventorying process. Additionally, the team recruited new ODCs for the smaller offices that make up the “Office of the Mayor,” which were previously served by a single Coordinator. MODA partnered with the Mayor’s Office of Operations this spring to better understand the data ecosystem of City Hall by studying the service areas of individual offices within the Mayor’s administration. The Office of Operations recruited 40 new ODCs from individual mayor’s offices, who in turn identified seven new datasets, which appear on this year’s compliance plan. New data publishers include the Mayor’s Office of Climate Policy and Programs, and the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice.

## Integrate Open Data into citywide processes.

Open Data is a tool to engage subject matter experts and interested novices in the information their City produces, and give them a voice in the decisions their government makes. As Open Data becomes routine across NYC government, we will look for opportunities to make small changes in existing processes and embed Open Data components into more City initiatives. Last November, the Mayor’s Office of Technology and Innovation hosted a “Broadband Data Dig” at the Brooklyn Public Library. Broadband policy experts, civic technologists, and data scientists together analyzed and developed recommendations for New York City’s digital infrastructure broadband strategy based on newly-released local and federal broadband data. That data included a block-level look at broadband availability in New York City (from federal data), as well as development-by-development information about broadband at the New York City Housing Authority. Participants used the datasets to help the City better understand the factors impacting broadband adoption, to develop solutions to address broadband inequities, and to design broadband data collection and maintenance policies.

## Never stop testing, never stop learning.

We must test our assumptions and try new ideas, collect information on our efforts, and analyze our performance for points of improvement. Open Data lies at the intersection of participatory politics, open information, and pioneering government technology; like these forward-thinking fields, Open Data is not static, and the City’s Open Data work should continue to adapt to the changing data ecosystem. This spring, the Open Data team added four new full-time staff to its ranks. MODA hired a Director of Civic Engagement and a Special Advisor to ensure that the program remains at the vanguard of the field, while also remaining in touch with user needs (and needs of the Open Data Coordinators). DoITT hired new coordinators, adding to the team’s capacity. In addition, more agencies than ever are investing resources in their data publishing efforts as the business case and civic imperative for Open Data becomes clearer.
