## Treat the publication of the dataset as the first step of opening data.

If the City publishes a dataset but no one uses it, is it really “open?” In New York City, “open” really means “useful.” In addition to partnering with DoITT on Open Data, MODA works with other City agencies on advanced data analytics projects. Using the data associated with a City operation, MODA develops models to make services better, faster, and more equitable. Another practical expression of this Open Data value is MODA’s commitment to Open Source Analytics, or its practice of sharing the process and results of data analytics projects with the public. It not only increases transparency on the way City agencies use data and develop algorithms, but also helps spread awareness of the power of data science in municipal service delivery. Simply handing over a finished set of analytics work limits civil servants’ insight into how the analysis was done. The process – including what type of analysis was conducted and why, insights gained from subject matter experts, and disclaimers on the data – is just as important as the results. Open Source Analytics is MODA’s commitment to replicability, in understanding analytics as a process that can be applied elsewhere. Working in government holds data analysts to a higher standard than industry to be transparent about goals, process, and results. To this end, this fall, MODA will release a project library, documentation on its framework for implementation, and hold an engagement tour for its Open Source Analytics work.
