# When Engagement Works: Beyond the TreesCount! 2015 Data Jam

In June 2016, the NYC Department of Parks and Recreation teamed up with [BetaNYC](http://beta.nyc), MODA, and the [Mayor's Office of Technology and Innovation](http://nyc.gov/forward) to host the "[TreesCount! Data Jam](https://treescountdatajam.devpost.com/)," where the community groups that collected [TreesCount! data](https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Environment/2015-Street-Tree-Census-Tree-Data/uvpi-gqnh) joined civic hackers to collaborate and use the 2015 street tree census data to solve problems. One of the challenges NYC Parks posed to attendees was: "How can we use Street Tree Census Data to better engage with and target the efforts of community stewardship volunteers to improve the health of the urban forest?" Participants Rob Elliott and Nandan Shetty were members of "When Engagement Works," the grand prize-winning team for that challenge.

Nandan is a doctoral student in engineering who also works part-time at NYC Parks' Forestry, Horticulture & Natural Resources division. Rob, an Earth Institute Postdoctoral Fellow at Columbia University, wrote his PhD dissertation on green infrastructure, and has spent much of his academic career thinking about municipal greenery. Of the Data Jam, Rob says, "It was really cool to see what people who didn't have their heads buried in street trees for a year had to offer. They brought a very new perspective to it, and lots of cool ideas came out."

"We built a hydrologic model that could turn the Tree Census data into a model of water retention," Nandan says. In other words, the team's data analysis demonstrated how healthy trees in New York City contribute to better stormwater management. The results showed that installing more tree guards improved both tree health and the cost effectiveness of stormwater management --- and that only 14 percent of NYC's 666,000 street trees had useful treeguards --- signs of community stewardship of those trees.

In a traditional hackathon, participants come together to work on a problem and then submit the results to the organizers at the end of the day-long event. Rob and Nandan's experience was different, in that their work continued long after the Data Jam. NYC Parks supported them in honing their research pitch, and invited them to present their results to Parks officials, following a model for deeper engagement that prioritizes ongoing rather than one-off collaboration. In July 2016, Rob and Nandan presented their project to the First Deputy Commissioner and Forestry Directors at NYC Parks; in that presentation, they showed that their work could justify more funding to implement tree guards, although more research was needed.

Recently, NYC Parks has sought potential funding for further research on this project through cooperation with the [NYC Department of Environmental Protection](http://nyc.gov/dep) and the [United States Geological Survey](http://usgs.gov). Nandan and Rob used the results from their original model to calculate cost-benefit analyses that justified continued research and involvement. The City and Federal departments are now developing study designs and parameters for multiple quantitative studies utilizing data from Nandan and Rob's Data Jam project.

These results were made possible by the high level of data accuracy in the TreesCount! street tree census. TreesCount! 2015 used an innovative approach that combined site surveying with geospatial technology to derive accurate tree locations. This allowed more than 2,200 volunteers to help NYC create a comprehensive and reliable map of the urban forest.

The TreesCount! 2015 project --- and Rob and Nandan's engagement with it --- represents the full cycle of Open Data's impact. TreesCount! 2015 engaged volunteers to help NYC manage the City's urban forest -- from data collection, to analysis, to operational impact -- showing how Open Data is more than a momentary step; it's an ongoing and deeper-level engagement between residents and government.
