# Open Data for Job Placement

NYC Open Data has been a crucial component of Mary Tobin's work addressing homelessness and joblessness in her Brooklyn neighborhood. Mary graduated from West Point and served in Baghdad as a Communications Officer for the U.S. Army, and later worked for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. In January 2017, she was named the Director of The Brownsville Partnership, an organization dedicated to reducing homelessness in the Brownsville neighborhood in Brooklyn. She came in with a bold objective: "I decided to put my flag in the ground around dramatically impacting the unemployment rate in Brownsville," she says.

Mary describes herself as a "data person" drawing on analytical communication skills she attributes to her time in Iraq. "Open Data has given me access to information on crucial cohorts," she says, referring to youth ages 16 through 24, single mothers, and those formerly incarcerated individuals -- groups that are all historically difficult to place in jobs. Administration for Children's Services data on childcare issues, Department of Education data on school performance, and Department of Probation data on juvenile offenders, along with demographic data from the federal census, help Mary focus resources most effectively to the populations she targets.

The Brownsville Partnership convenes stakeholders from local workforce agencies, healthcare institutions, and social service organizations to collaborate on job placement. Without data, understanding these issues at the hyperlocal-level relied on piecemeal and anecdotal information. Open Data supplied "critical data pieces" to build a more holistic picture. For instance, geographically-specific data from the NYPD show that homicides in Brownsville have gone down significantly over the last two or three years, while robberies in South Brownsville have gone up. Open Data helps tell hyper-local, evidence-based stories about the community, which has proven essential to calling community members to action, as well as fundraising efforts.

Working with VizAlytics, Mary built a data dashboard in the "Command Center," a physical space with a data visualization that helps focus meetings with community partners around regularly refreshed neighborhood indicators based on Open Data.  Mary says that these community partners appreciate the centralization of up-to-date indicators on the dashboard, which serves an important communication function: the conversations that happen over the data visualizations help inform partners of the data they need; community feedback, in turn helps Mary fine-tune the data included on the dashboard. On the importance of Open Data in this feedback loop, Mary says, "It's everything, it's the foundation."

Mary is a founding member of the Neighborhood Innovation Lab's Brownsville Community Technology Advisory Board. As part of the Mayor's Neighborhood Innovation Lab initiative to build a community ideas lab addressing neighborhood concerns through cutting-edge technology, Mary and other partners will use Open Data, along with other data sources, to evaluate the effectiveness of the pilots. Open Data-savvy advisors like Mary are critical to the process.
