# Civic Innovation Fellowship

New York City’s 59 Community Boards play an important role in local oversight of municipal service delivery. However, because each one is run by just two full-time employees along with  volunteer representatives, many Community Boards struggle to engage effectively with the demands of the digital landscape. Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer, a former City Councilmember and longtime champion of both Community Boards and open data, wants that to change. Her office partnered with BetaNYC, the Fund for the City of New York, and Data & Society to support the “Civic Innovation Fellowship.” Each year, the program educates a select cohort of CUNY students in media theory, local history, and open data analysis while giving students hands-on experience developing civic technology for community board clients.

Shalom Joseph, who now works professionally as a data analyst, was a fellow in the 2015-16 school year while a student at John Jay College of Criminal Justice. Lester Barrett, a rising senior [fact check] at Medgar Evers College, was a fellow the following year. Both studied computer science in college;  looking for professional experience in a technology field, they applied to the selective CUNY Service Corp Fellows, where they were accepted and found matches with Borough President Brewer’s Civic Innovation Fellowship. For Lester and Shalon, it was their first exposure to data analytics through Open Data.

The fellowship curriculum, developed by BetaNYC, relies on open data to teach students data skills — a model of citizenship for a digital age. The curriculum is a crash course in the data created by City government operations. The two took part in multi-week boot camps, where they learned an array of data cleaning, analysis, and public speaking skills; the goal was to develop the skills for manipulating data in conjunction with the skills for communicating it. Telling stories by visualizing data was “an eye-opening experience,” Shalom explains. “It taught me that what we’re diving into is way bigger than just what we’re being taught right now.” By the end of the boot camp, both Lester and Shalom put their new skillsets to use, presenting “data stories” to community leaders based on City data, especially from the records created by New Yorkers each day in the [311 Service Requests from 2010 to Present](https://nycopendata.socrata.com/Social-Services/311-Service-Requests-from-2010-to-Present/erm2-nwe9) dataset.

Both Lester and Shalom found that NYC Open Data was critical to the Civic Innovation Fellowship, in both the skills they gained and their understanding of why those skills were relevant. “Without Open Data, we wouldn’t have had anything to do,” Shalom says. “We wouldn’t have had examples, we wouldn’t have had anything to go from, we wouldn’t have really had an understanding of why what we’re learning is important. The stories that are behind Open Data, everything that went into it, the people that were involved — it motivated me to really understand that as a New Yorker, this is something that I should pay attention to.”
